
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 
 
CENTRAL-SECTOR SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME 
OF 
NATIONAL OVERSEAS SCHOLARSHIP FOR ST STUDENTS 
 
 
 
2021-22 to 2025-26 
===== PAGE 2 =====
2 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Sl.No Particulars Page No 
1 Introduction 3  
2 Salient features of the scheme 3  
2.1 Scope 3  
2.2 Conditions of eligibility 3  
3 Subjects and slots covered under the scheme 5  
3.1 Duration of award with financial assistance 5  
3.2 Value of scholarship 5  
4 Selection procedure 7  
4.1 On-Line application through portal 7  
4.2 Registration process 7  
4.3 Documents required for filling application form 7  
4.4 Preparation of merit list 8  
4.5 Constitution of expert committee 9  
5 Role of Indian Embassy/ Mission abroad 10  
6 Other Conditions 10  
7 Cancellation of award 11  
8 Litigation 11  
9 Change in the provisions of the scheme 11  
 
===== PAGE 3 =====
3 
 
 
NATIONAL OVERSEAS SCHOLARSHIPS FOR ST STUDENTS 
  
1.      INTRODUCTION 
It is a Central Sector Scheme of Ministry of Tribal Affairs under which scholarships are 
given to the meritorious Schedule Tribe (ST) students for pursuing higher education in 
reputed Institutes/Universities abroad. The Scheme will be implemented through the 
Indian Embassies/Missions abroad, Ministry of External Affairs. The provisions of this 
scheme guideline will be applicable from 2021-22 and onwards.  
  
2.      SALIENT FEATURE OFTHE SCHEME 
2.1.      SCOPE 
i. Financial assistance is provided for pursuing post graduate courses (Masters, Ph. 
D and Post-Doctoral Research) in reputed universities across the world.    
Bachelor level courses in any discipline are not covered under the scheme.  
ii. 20 awards every year would be sanctioned to ST students as under:  
Sl. No. Category No. of Award 
1 ST candidates  17 
2 Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTG) 03 
  Total 20 
 
iii. If for any specific year, successful candidates are not available to the extent 
prescribed for one of the above listed categories, the awards for that year would 
become open for the other category. 
iv. 30% of the scholarship awards are earmarked for female candidates.  However, 
in case, adequate female candidates are not available, the unutilized slots will 
become open for eligible male candidates. 
 2.2. CONDITIONS OF ELIGIBILITY  
 (i). Qualification  
Sr. No. Course Marks and educational qualification Maximum Age as 
on 1st July of 
selection year 
1 Post-Doctoral 
Research 
55% marks or equivalent grade in 
relevant Master's  
Degree* with awarded Ph.D. 
38 years 
2 Ph. D 55% marks or equivalent grade in 
relevant Master's Degree 
35 years 
3 Master's 55% marks or equivalent grade in  32 years  
===== PAGE 4 =====
4 
 
Sr. No. Course Marks and educational qualification Maximum Age as 
on 1st July of 
selection year 
Degree relevant Bachelor's Degree. 
 
Note:    The criteria of marks obtained in Bachelor’s/Master’s Degree will not apply to 
those candidates who have already obtained admissions in top 1,000 Institutes as QS 
World ranking of the latest available report. 
(ii). One child in a family and one timeassistance 
Not more than one child of the same parents will be eligible and the candidate has to 
furnish a self-certification to this effect. An individual is eligible for only one award and 
cannot be considered for any other award or same/higher level of award for the second 
time under the Scheme 
(iii). Income Criteria 
Scholarships will be paid to the students whosefamilyincome from all sources does not 
exceed Rs.6,00,000/- (Rs. Six lakhs only) per annum. 
The family income shall be computed in the following manner: - 
I. In case where both father and mother are working, the combined income of 
both of them from all sources shall be taken into account in computing total 
family income. 
II. In case any other member of the family, other than father and mother, is an 
earning member, his or her income shall not be included in computing total 
family income. 
III. In case only one parent is alive, the income of that parent shall be taken into 
account for considering total family income .  If other sibling or family member 
is an earning member, their income shall not be included in computing total 
family income. 
IV. In case of an orphan, supported by a guardian, income criteria shall not 
apply. 
Note 1: Definition of Income - Income means gross income including income from all 
sources without and exemption and deductions available in the Income Tax Act. 
Note 2: Income certificate is required to be taken once only i.e. at the time of admission 
to course which will be valid for the entire duration of the course.  
Note 3: The income certificate given at the time of admission should be taken in the 
same year for which the admission is taken. In case of salaried employee, the income 
of previous financial year will be considered for the purpose of eligibility. For example, 
if a candidate applies afresh for academic year 2021-22, the family income for financial 
year 2020-21 would be required. 
 
===== PAGE 5 =====
5 
 
3.0.      SUBJECTS AND SLOTS COVERED UNDER THE SCHEME 
The subjects/disciplines in which student can opt for studies abroad and the number of 
slots available under each fieldfor grant of award are listed below: - 
 
Field of study Number of slots for the field of 
study 
Pure/Applied Science/ Engineering/Technology/ 
Mathematics (STEM) 
 
10  
  Management, Economics, Finance, Law  04 
Agriculture/Medicine 04 
Humanities/Social Science/Fine Arts 02 
 
3.1.      Duration of award with Financial Assistance:   
Financial assistance will be provided till completion of the course/research or the 
prescribed duration of the course, whichever is earlier: - 
 
Sl.No. Course Maximum Duration 
1 Post-Doctoral Research 2 years 
2 Ph. D 4 years (four years) 
3 Master's Degree 1 or 2 years (One/Two years) depending upon the 
type and duration of the Course. 
 
Note:  Extension of stay beyond prescribed duration for levels of courses as mentioned 
above, will be without financial assistance of any kind except the air passage to return to 
India, if the candidate decides to come back to India on completion of the course.    
3.2.      Value of scholarship 
 Sl.No. Scholarship 
Component 
Details 
1 Annual Maintenance 
Allowance 
  
The Annual maintenance allowance in USD 15,400 ($ 
Fifteen thousand four hundred only) in US/ Pound 
sterling 9,900 (£ Nine thousand nine hundred only) in 
United King dom for all level courses.  For other 
countries, the USD or equivalent rates would be 
applicable.  
2 Annual Contingency 
and Equipment 
Allowance 
  
The Annual Contingency and Equipment Allowance for 
books/essentialapparatus/study tour/typing and bin ding 
of thesis etc. will be $ 1532 (US Dollars One thousand 
five hundred thirty-two only) for the candidates in US 
and for candidates in United Kingdom, it will be £ 1116 
===== PAGE 6 =====
6 
 
 Sl.No. Scholarship 
Component 
Details 
(Pounds sterling One thousand one hundred sixteen 
only). For other countries, US Dollar or eq uivalent rates 
would be applicable. 
3 Poll Tax Actuals shall be paid, wherever applicable 
4 Visa Fees Actual visa fees in Indian Rupees will be paid. 
5 Incidental Journey 
Expenses 
Incidental journey expenses up to US Dollars 20 or its 
equivalent in Indian Rupees are permissible. 
6 Fees Tuition fees and other non-refundable fees which is 
required to be compulsorily paid by the student for 
completion of the course, as per actuals. 
7 Medical Insurance 
Premium 
Actuals as charged will be admissible. The Ind ian 
Embassy/Mission in the respective country will 
however examine the reasonableness of medical 
premium opted/claimed by the student.  
8 Cost of Air Passage 
  
Air passage grant on actual basis from India to the 
nearest place to the educational institutio n and back to 
India, by economy class and shortest route at best 
available price shall be provided. 
9 Local Travel 
  
Second class railway fare from the port of 
disembarkation to the place of study and back; in case 
of far flung places not connected by rail, bus fare from 
the place of residence to the nearest railway station, 
actual charge of crossing by ferry, air fare to the 
nearest rail-cum-air Station will be permissible. 
 
Note 1: -  
a. In case of unforeseen circumstances like pandemic, natural calamity, war etc., if an 
NOS awardee comes to India and pursues studies online, the Maintenance 
Allowance will be provided as per the rate of Junior Research Fellow (JRF) for 
Master Degree and as per the rate of Senior Research Fellow (SRF) for PhD and 
Post Doctorate course admissible under the scheme of National Fellowship for ST 
students during the online study period. The maintenance allowance asperforeign 
rates may be resumed as and when the awardee joins the universityabroad to 
continue on-campus studies. 
b. In case, any NOS awardee comes to India for field study, as part of Course 
requirement, he would be required to take permission from the concerned Institute 
and Indian Embassy justifying that the field study in India is integral to successful 
completion of the course. The candidate will inform the Ministry by updating the 
details on the portal.  The awardee will be provided Maintenance Allowance as per 
the rate of JRF for Master Degree and SRF for PhD and Post Doctorate course 
admissible under the schemeof National Fellowship for ST students of the Ministry 
===== PAGE 7 =====
7 
 
for the duration of the field study. The maintenance allowance as per foreign rates 
will be resumed only when the awardee joins his/her university abroad after 
completing field study in India.  In such a situation, the candidate will be entitled for 
to and fro airfare only once for the entire duration of the course.   
c. For the duration of the student’s stay for which the student stays in India, the 
maintenance allowance payable abroad as per foreign rates will be proportionately 
reduced.  
Note 2: The Students once considered for scholarship shall not be entitled for any other 
scholarship of the Centre/ State Govt for the same study. 
Note 3. The Indian Embassy/Mission located in respective country will disburse the above 
listed financial assistance to the Institute and the student and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
shall reimburse the same to the Ministry of External Affairs.  
Note 4: If the student comes to India in between the course, he will be required to duly 
inform, the Indian Mission and the institution of study. The awardee will, however, be 
required to bear to and fro journey expenses for the visit and shall also not be entitled to 
receive maintenance allowance under the scheme, for the period of being away from the 
place of his/her educational institution abroad. The maintenance allowance shall be 
resumed by the Indian Mission only from the date of his/her resuming same course at the 
same institution.  
 
4.0.      SELECTION PROCEDURE 
4.1.      ON-LINE APPLICATION THROUGH PORTAL 
The applications for scholarships under the schemewill be invited online through National 
Overseas Scholarship Portal (NOSP) developed by the Ministry (overseas.tribal.gov.in).  The 
opening and closing of the portal would be announced through an advertisement in Employment 
News, other prominent News Dailies, through Institutes/Universities, State Governments and 
through the Ministry’s Portal.  Applicants are advised to go through the Instruction Manual before 
applying online and for any query, may refer to the helpdesk module given on the portal.   
 
 4.2.      REGISTRATION PROCESS:    
Before filling application form online, candidates are required to register themselves on 
the NOSP and on Digi Locker. Aadhaar is mandatory for registration on portal.  The 
applicant would be required to upload documents through Digi locker. 
 
 4.3.      DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR FILLING DOCUMENTS REQUIRED FOR    
             FILLING APPLICATION FORM   
 
Applicant will be required to upload the following documents on the portal for registration:   
 Latest Coloured Passport Size Photograph 
===== PAGE 8 =====
8 
 
 ST certificate issued by the competent authority 
 PVTG certificate issued by the competent authority (if applicable) 
 10th Certificate/Marksheet in support of Date of Birth 
 Graduation / Post-Graduation mark sheet [Aggregate marks in %] /equivalent % 
marks in   case of CGPA / Ph. D completion certificate, wherever applicable 
(Conversion sheet of aggregate marks into percentage to be issued by 
Institute/University) 
 Offer of admission 
 Income Certificate 
  
The candidates need to ensure that they fulfil all the eligibility criteria at the time of applying for 
scholarship. If it is found that the candidate does not have the eligibility or the candidate fails to 
upload the required document which are mandatory to prove their eligibility, the application will 
be liable to be rejected. 
  
4.4.      PREPARATION OF MERIT LIST 
All applications received within the stipulated period, will be scrutinized for the eligibility 
criteria. Separate merit list will be drawn for each field of study as mentioned in para 3.3. 
above. The eligible applications will be considered for award of scholarship as per the 
procedure given below: 
a. First priority will be given to the candidates who have already got admission and are 
pursuing their studies in the top 1,000 ranked foreign Institutes/Universities (as per 
the latest QS world ranking).  The merit list will be drawn based on the ranking of 
the Institute.   In case of a tie between the QS rankings of two or more candidates, 
merit will be decided on the basis of marks/grades secured by the candidate in the 
qualifying examination for higher studies for which the scholarship has been applied 
for. 
 
Note: -  
 If selected, the student will be entitled for scholarship prospectively from the date 
of issuance of award letter. No reimbursement will be made for the fee already 
paid by the student to the University and the expenses incurred on Insurance etc.   
However, the Maintenance and Contingency and Equipment allowance will be 
given in proportion to number of months for the remaining financial year from the 
date of issue of Award letter.  For subsequent years, the student will be eligible for 
scholarship covering all fee and other expenses (mentioned in para 3.5) for the 
remaining duration of the course (as mentioned in para 3.4). 
b. In case sufficient number of students are not selected as mentioned in para (a) 
above, merit list will be drawn from the candidates who have already secured 
preliminary letter/offer of admission from top 1,000 ranked foreign 
===== PAGE 9 =====
9 
 
Institutes/Universities (as per the QS world ranking) and are yet to join.  Merit list 
will be drawn in similar manner as mentioned in para ‘a’ above; i.e based on the 
ranking of the Institute and in case of tie in ranking of university/institution, the 
marks/grades secured by the candidate in the qualifying examination. 
c. In case sufficient students are not selected as per para “a” and “b” above, the 
vacant slots will be filled from among the remaining eligible candidates through 
personal interview by a committee of experts constituted by the Ministry.  The 
candidates who have cleared GRE/GMAT/TOFEL etc. will be given preference.  
 
Note:  The finally selected candidates will be required to secure admission and join in one 
of the top 1,000 ranked foreign Institutes/Universities abroad (as per the QS world 
ranking) within 2 years from the date of communication of Award Letter. On expiry of this 
specified period of time, the award will automatically get cancelled.  
 
Note:    
d. In case, the candidates who are selected as per para “b” and “c” do not secure 
admission and join in one of the top 1,000 ranked foreign Institutes/Universities 
abroad within 2 years from the date of communication of selection, such unfilled 
seats will be carried over to the next selection year immediately after the expiry of 
such time period. For example, if the date of provisional award is 01.09.2019, the 
candidate is required to get admission latest by 30.9.2021. In case the students 
fail to take admission within the prescribed time limit, such slots will be carried 
over to the selection year 2021-22.   
e. Verification of the selected candidates as per para “a” above will be done through 
the Indian Embassy/Mission in the respective country. Verification of the short-
listed candidates as per para “b” and “c” will be done through the respective 
State/UT.   
f. The short-listed candidates who are required to appear in Interview before the 
Expert Committee will be entitled to reimbursement of second-class train fare/bus 
fare from the place of residence to the place of interview, by shortest route. 
g. Provisional merit list of eligible candidates will be posted on the Ministry's website. 
 
4.5.      CONSTITUTION OF EXPERT COMMITTEE: 
The Ministry will constitute a Selection Committee with domain experts.  The Chairperson 
and members of the committee will be entitled to be paid economy air fare and the rate of 
hotel accommodation and D.A. would be as admissible to them as per eligibility in their 
concerned department/University/Institute. Further, honorarium of Rs.2500 a day will be 
paid to the members. If the members of the Committee are from New Delhi then a sitting 
fee inclusive of travelling allowance not exceeding Rs. 5000/- a day will be payable, for 
each day of their participation.  
===== PAGE 10 =====
10 
 
5.      ROLE OF INDIAN EMBASSY/MISSION ABROAD 
Before releasing scholarships to the candidates, the Indian Embassies/Missions abroad 
shall see the overall performance/ behaviour of the candidate. 
i. In order to have a better connect with the students and status of their studies the 
student will submit progress report on the NOS Portal once in every 6 months.  The 
Indian Mission abroad shall obtain performance reports from the 
university/institution where the awardee is pursuing his/her studies for which the 
award was given under the scheme and update the information thereon and other 
relevant information such as joining reports, discontinuation of studies etc., on 
online portal of the Ministry (https://overseas.tribal.gov.in/) as per the prescribed 
format. 
ii. The Mission shall inform this Ministry any serious adverse developments in case of 
the awardee which requires decision towards further continuation of the award or 
otherwise.  
iii. Before leaving the country, the student will be required to take permission 
ofIndian Mission and inform the Ministry on the portal.  
iv. The Indian Mission will also be responsible for activities as mentioned in para 
4.4(e) 
 
6.      OTHER CONDITIONS 
i. Selected candidates shall furnish all such documents and enter into such 
agreements before their departure as shall be decided by the Government of India 
from time to time. In case the candidate is already residing abroad, he/she shall 
furnish all relevant documents and enter into such agreements prior to the release 
of the scholarship by the Indian Mission. 
ii. The candidate shall not change the course of study or research and the Institute 
for which scholarship has been sanctioned. 
iii. It will be the responsibility of candidate to obtain the appropriate visa for a 
country wherein he/she intends to study.  
iv. In case the awardee has received overpayment through Indian Mission abroad or 
any other Government agency, he/she shall refund the same to Indian Mission 
abroad.   
v. After completion of the course, the awardee shall upload the course completion 
details along with brief of study in the Alumni Module of NOS portal of the Ministry 
before his return tickets are booked.  
 
===== PAGE 11 =====
11 
 
7.      CANCELLATION OF AWARD 
The award of the scholarship will be cancelled and no financial support will be provided. 
Also, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs may recover the already paid award amount in case 
of any of the following:  
i. The awardee has taken admission by submitting false documents or not 
conforming to the guidelines governing the Scheme; 
ii. The awardee returning to India without successfully completing the course for 
which he/she has been selected.  
Note:  If the failure to complete the course is due to ill-health, he would require to 
submit certificate of medical officer nominated by the Indian Mission abroad. 
iii. The student is involved in any illegal activity or antinational activity or 
misconduct or associated with use of narcotic substances or involved in 
violation of law of the host country or in the event of any police case against 
the candidate. 
 
8.     LITIGATION 
Any litigation on matters arising out of this scheme in India will be subject to sole 
jurisdiction of the courts situated in Union Territory of Delhi. The litigations arising 
abroad will be attended to by the Indian Missions abroad. 
 
 9.      CHANGE IN THE PROVISIONS OF THE SCHEME: 
The provisions of this Scheme can be changed at any time with the approval of Minister 
of Tribal Affairs, Government of India. 
 
* * * * * * * * * * 